once around Neptune.
So starting with the map of Capernicus
and Newton's era of the solar system, we
obviously had the sun in the center,
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn, and then the outer realm was
populated entirely by stars. There were
no suggestions that there were
additional planets out there. But of
course, Hershel came along and
discovered the planet Uranus. And
mapping the orbit of Uranus led to an
anomaly. And that was investigated by
both John Cooch Adams here in Cambridge
and Urbane Leier in Paris. both had the
same idea that the misbehavior of Uranus
might be due to the pull of an unknown
planet. And they set about trying to
work out from Newton's laws where that
planet might be and how big it might be.
In fact, they used a number of sensible
guesses. They assumed it was about the
same size and they assumed that it would
be in a geometric ratio further out in
terms of distance from the sun.
But of course they were doing all the
calculations entirely by hand and trying
to back calculate where this object
might be is an extremely daunting task
indeed.
But they came up with some remarkably
accurate predictions.
You can see drawn in the upper diagram
there a straight line with the position
of the planet found in
roughly the center there as a little
black triangle.
Lear's prediction was very close indeed,
the small pink square. and Adams, well,
he had a number of stabs at different
calculations, but they're all relatively
close by. Um, some better than others,
but if you consider that they could have
been anywhere around the 360 degrees of
ark, then perhaps you'd forgive the fact
that they're not perfect. And in fact,
if you look at it in terms of an orbital
diagram with the sun in the center at
the bottom there, where Neptune was
actually found and where Adams and
Levarier had predicted it and they
predicted orbits were certainly in the
right direction. Um although both Adams
and Levaria had made the assumption that
Neptune would be slightly further away
based on a guess of its distance
following that geometric ratio uh
essentially the Titus Bode law of the
organization of the known planets would
have put it further out.
Now it was Leier who sent his prediction
to Berlin to the astronomer Gala who
went out on the 23rd of September 1846
and used the telescope very effectively
to find the new planet very close to
Larier's prediction. Meanwhile, back
here in Cambridge, the North Sumberland
telescope, seen in the dome at the back
there, uh was used by the director
Chalice and he organized a search that
he himself, his assistants and students
were conducting mapping the area in uh
the predicted region of the sky over
quite a large area actually. Um so he
set himself quite a challenge looking
for anything that had moved from one
observation to another. So the plan was
to map the entire area three times. Now
they actually noted and I have a copy of
the uh print out of the uh page from the
notebook here. Um
they noted a small blue disc a couple of
times during that. Um, but they'd been
directed to map, so they carried on
doing so, even though they knew really
that they were looking for a planet. Um,
and actually were the first to record it
in, uh, terms of seeing a small blue
disc. So, uh, we're not bitter and
twisted about failing to discover
Neptune here in Cambridge at all,
really. Really. Okay, let's move on.
Well, it turns out that uh Chalice
wasn't the only person to have missed
the discovery. Sir John Herschel, son of
William, was another almost discoverer
of Neptune. He documented it in 1846
that he'd actually seen a small blue
disc in 1830 and not realized what it
was he was looking at. So, it could have
been uh father and son discovering the
two planets, but it wasn't.
Although actually perhaps this man beat
them to it. Galileo.
It's a page from his notebook and in it
it records a small blue star that had
moved. He was actually watching Jupiter
pass Neptune. And he was more interested
in Jupiter and the motion of its moons
in se uh December of 1612 and January
1613. Uh but he did in fact record the
movement of Neptune. So had he realized
what he was looking at, it would have
been down to Galileo rather than anybody
else. So it orbits around the sun. It
takes a long time, 165 years at that
distance of 30 AU. Uh Uranus is at just
under 20 and Saturn just under 10. So
the solar system out here is getting
very large indeed. And the mass well 17
times the mass of the Earth. It's a
little bit more massive than uh the 14.5
times for Uranus. So, a little bit more
massive than both Adams and Levier were
expecting.
You can't see it with the naked eye. It
only ever gets to magnitude 8, which is
at least 10 times too faint to see. So,
um, when the, uh, press talk about see
all the planets in the sky and gay trot
out the idea of seeing Uranus and
Neptune. Yeah, you won't. Uh, they're
just too faint. Uranus is a definite
maybe, but it'd be very, very difficult
to know what you're looking at. Just
about detect it as a faint star, but
there are an awful lot of faint stars,
so that's really hard. But Neptune, you
have no chance. you need a pretty good
telescope with a decent amount of
magnification to see it.
So after its discovery, uh Neptune was
originally referred to as just the
planet exterior to Uranus or just
Leier's planet. Um and that wasn't very
satisfactory really. Gala who discovered
it telescopically suggested the name
Janus from mythology. Chalice got in on
the act and put the name Oceanianis
forward and Levier himself jumped in
with Neptune, but he falsely stated that
this would officially approved by the
French Bureau of Longitude
August body associated with astronomy.
Um, and they had actually disowned that
afterwards. They said they they hadn't
made any such pronouncement. And that's
not surprising because uh Leverier was
described as the least popular man in
Europe, which is really going some.
In October, he changed his mind and
suggested it be called Leier, naming it
after himself and claiming it was his
right from the point of view of having
been the discoverer. Uh which, well, he
predicted it. Gala was the discoverer.
You might argue French documentation,
French almanacs and listings jumped on
the idea. They started calling it Leier,
but they also started calling Uranus
Hersel at that point, trying to persuade
everybody that what if they assumed that
Uranus was called Hershel that it must
be okay to call uh the new planet Lever.
But no one outside of France really
wanted to play that game. Um, and
eventually an astronomer called Stru
Neptune being used at a conference in
St. Petersburg and suggested that the
blue color shown here in this marvelous
photograph. And you can see that blue
color um with a a powerful telescope
reflecting the idea that uh this was the
blue of the ocean and Neptune being the
god of the sea that soon became adopted.
And that picture well it's from Voyager
2. In fact, this is Voyager 2 flyby of
the 25th of August 19 uh sorry yeah
1989. the only spacecraft to visit this
part of the outer solar system. And what
a magnificent voyage that was. It took
this photograph of the whole disc of the
planet zoomed in on the great dark spot.
And the atmosphere is terrifically cold,
55 Kelvin. Actually, Uranus is even
colder uh by a few degrees. But the wind
speed was the real surprise. is the wind
speeds of over,00 miles an hour in the
atmosphere of Neptune. So here's another
zoomed in photograph with really good
contrast showing the great dark spot and
the little hurricane down at the bottom
there called the scooter.
A amazing uh that they're tra the clouds
that you can see are moving so fast
through the atmosphere. There's another
picture of some cloud tops in the
atmosphere of Neptune. Now, James Webb
Space Telescope has got in on the act
and photographed the uh planet itself
and the rings. The rings were a
discovery of Voyager 2, although at the
time they were reported as ring arcs
because they're not equally thick all
the way around and uh the um main
brightest rings particularly so uh for
reasons which uh are to do with the some
of the behavior of the moons of Neptune.
Uh but this is a marvelous image in
infrared of uh Neptune and its rings and
some of those moons taken with James
Webb.
More photographs here of the changing
pattern of weather on the surface and
the clouds moving around. These are
Hubble Space Telescope photographs taken
in uh 2015, so 10 years ago or so. And
then more going up from 1994 to 2020
again with the Hubble telescope uh
showing the everchanging pattern of
weather going on. So we always see that
main picture of the great dark spot
taken from Voyager 2 because it was the
only probe to get there and get up close
and personal. Uh nowadays the space
telescopes can do a reasonable job of
imaging it but you can see how much less
resolution there is in any of these.
Hubble also took a picture and then it
was combined with a near infrared image
from the web telescope. So this is both
telescopes getting in on the act and
showing the planet, the weather systems
and the aurora
in the green, the pale green color, the
aurora of particles trapped in uh
Neptune's magnetic field spiraling down
onto the planet. So we finally detected
aurora on all the major planets.
Another
Hubble wide field camera 3 picture
showing a new dark spot. The original
great dark spot faded away, but now
there is a new dark spot and a smaller
one as well. So these dark spots do come
and go. And I think it's interesting to
see that because of course we've been
worried that the uh great red spot on
Jupiter may go away. It's faded a bit a
few times, but it keeps coming back. So,
it's interesting to see Neptune's
behavior being slightly different
internally. Well, we have a core of rock
and metal, nickel and iron that we think
weighs just 120% the mass of the Earth.
And then a superc critical fluid of what
we call ices, but these are um water,
ammonia, and methane. They're very hot,
high density, high electrical
conductivity, and it's that that is
responsible spinning away, giving the
magnetic field. Um, and the water
molecules under these conditions are
breaking down into like an ionized soup
of hydrogen and oxygen. So quite a a
thoroughly bizarre mixture. And right
down in the depths, it may even uh be uh
decomposing some of the methane. And the
temperature in the center, 5,100°
centigrade. So getting on for the
temperature of the surface of the sun
down in the middle there. So no wonder.
And a pressure of 7 million atmospheres.
Quite incredible.
So if you drill down 7 kilometers into
the mantle, then that methane
decomposition
can start to cause the hydrogen and
carbon to separate and the carbon then
bonds with itself forming diamonds. And
we think that there is diamond rain
rather like hailstones falling down
through the superc critical fluid
heading down towards the core presumably
accumulating down there. Um quite
incredible. And over the top of the
mantle there may be a layer of liquid
carbon uh with floating solid diamonds
in it. Uh so quite amazing that these
diamonds uh could exist in such vast
quantities in on this very very strange
world. Now that's really all I've got to
say about Neptune. I do have a couple of
other videos for you uh to go into more
about its amazing moons. There's once
around Triton because I think Triton is
so fascinating with its geysers and its
retrograde orbit. and it's spiraling in
and uh a whole lot of history and
possible association uh with other Kiper
belt objects as well. So do check that
one out. Um and I started off trying to
create one about the whole collection of
the moons of Neptune, but I ended up
creating one all about Triton because
there was just so much to say about it
and then put one together about all the
rest of the moons as well. So, there's
two videos for you to to look at. Once
around Triton and once around the moons
of Neptune to go with this one. Anyway,
that's it for now. Thank you very much
for listening and I'll see you on
another time.